there and there were people who have
only good in their life relatively
speaking who don't believe in God so I'm
challenging my own question because I've
wrestled with this because I I think the
the hardest law in the 613 laws of the
Torah is to love God with all your heart
and all your soul I I long believe
that's the hardest I have no problem
trying to throw yourself into existence
fully as if it's good yes and that's a
rough one because serious look at it
that's right that's right that's right
so Soldier knitson was struck in the
concentration camps by goodness though
constantly and it was out of that seed
of the observation of goodness
[Music]
emerged and therefore in some no in no
small part
salsa Neeson is a prophet and he said
well he said that he view he he really
noticed particularly and he was
atheistic when he went into the camps
that the The Devout religious Believers
were able to to maintain their moral
Integrity in Camp and physical yes yeah
not always because he said no like let's
not push this sometimes people just got
shot but he saw people and he tells very
compelling stories of people who
thrived and became healthier in the face
of the privation under the ultimate
moral authority of their own Shining
Soul and the stories in the gulag
especially in volume two are they're
unbelievably compelling and Frankel said
similar things and solzhenitzen was
particularly careful not to say that
doesn't mean I'm saying that everyone
who failed failed because of their moral
flaws or that purity of heart would
necessarily save you he's a complex
thinker but that's one of the Miracles I
think he saw when I was talking about
him earlier because he it was you know
he he talked about how some people were
Hardy and and robust and he was careful
to say it's like you can secret your way
to Health in a gulag right he wasn't
being flippant about it but he was
noticing that some people who had and
they wouldn't resources they wouldn't
cooperate right
yeah they were never become trustees and
they tell the it was Cool Hand Luke yeah
yeah yeah yeah it's also the epistemic
human the epistemic humility though the
difference between the presumption that
you you know all there is and it's bad
and you're saying I don't have it all I
mean you think those last words that job
says at the very end of of of of the
Book of Job
therefore have I uttered that I
understood not things too wonderful me
which I knew not right that at the end
of it all saying I didn't actually
understand the whole picture well it's
also hope in that you know because one
of the things is that
if you're suffering terribly
there's two options in front of you in
some sense one is you're suffering
terribly and it's unjust and you're
suffering terribly because the cosmos
itself is flawed in its fundamental
structure and that's really Kane's
complaint against God the other
possibility is you're suffering at least
in part because you're not everything
you could be and that's a terrible
burden to take on to yourself because
it's the burden of your own suffering
but it's also unbelievably hopeful
because it could be that I think maybe
Frankel recounts that story I don't
remember where I read it a woman
who who visited a psychiatrist and who
said to the psychiatrist I really hope
there's something wrong with me and the
psychiatrist said why she said well if
there's something wrong with me there's
hope because I might be able to fix it
but if there's something wrong with the
structure of existence so I'm fated to
suffer in this way then why everything's
Despair and the people that I have seen
who've transcended their
tragedy and malevolence that have
pursued them they did have that that
sense of their own ignorance even with
regards to the conclusions they drew
about
their suffering and so Franco himself
has this very odd story at the end of
the book where after this this array of
unspeakable Horrors he then talks about
this particularly sadistic brutal figure
whom he'd known from some Clinic the
Stein whatever in Indiana or something
and then he says that he heard a story
that this man this concentration camp
figure had been sent off to a Russian
camp at the end of the war and then
heard from another colleague that this
brutal figure
um had actually been extremely Humane
and supportive as an inmate of a Soviet
camp and and it's that very enigmatic
ending of Frankel's book where it's
almost as if to say even where you're
convinced that there's evil that's
irredeemable but maybe there's there's
still yeah for Redemption I know that's
a bit it seems like a bit but it is
why is that idea considered so dangerous
what idea this idea that because you
know even when we want it to be well we
want it to it immediately goes into
blaming the victim like even you even
went to pains to say he wasn't saying
that anybody could ride through the
Inner Light of their soul come out
positively in a gulag but there's such a
resistance against this notion it's like
it's almost outside the Overton window
to say you can alleviate some of your
own suffering by your orientation
towards the world it's almost considered
a dangerous proposition now and and we
have to go to pains to make caveats
about it when we even mention it yeah
well it's a tricky business when my
daughter was young and she was really
ill I told her when she was very young I
said to her don't you use your illness
as an excuse ever because you'll confuse
yourself then you won't know what you
can do you're going to have a hard time
doing things but if you use your illness
as an excuse if you corrupt yourself
morally which you have in some sense
every right to do because of the depth
of your suffering and which would be
perfectly understandable under the
circumstances it will do nothing at all
but make the situation far worse yeah